                                            Abstract
The perspectives of responsive approach in web development in the design and layout implementation by web developers are analyzed. It is due to, primarily, a significant increase in mobile internet traffic and increase the diversity of electronic devices. The optimal responsive approach compared with the development of certain versions of websites for different devices is analyzed. It is shown that responsive approach provides greater website support by all devices. This is achieved thanks to its particular advantages, including the use of HTML and CSS code to display a website on all devices and adapting the content to the width of the browser. Definition of the term «responsive web design» by different authors and scholars are considered. The basic components using this approach are theoretically described and practical examples are given. In particular, the use of relative values for a given width of the container and child elements, use of media queries for laptops, tablets and mobile phones. «Mobile-first» approach is investigated as an independent web development philosophy and at the same time, as an integral part of responsive website page layout, its advantages and disadvantages. An example for the analysis of website responsibility was selected resource of the American newspaper «The Boston Globe». With a significant every year growth of screen resolution the issue of JPEG format feasibility for displaying graphics of the website is became actual. Therefore, the analysis of SVG format is carried out. Graphics clarity isn’t lost for it and the output file size much smaller as a result. It is shown that this is achieved through describing two-dimensional graphics in XML and using three types of objects: shapes, images and text. Despite the fact that today there is access to many popular frameworks that are already implemented responsibility, many companies continue to develop multiple versions of websites for different devices. This significantly increases the resource costs for their support, and as a result they are available for a small portion of users.




















1.Introduction:
Many  years  ago  we  could  access  the  Internet  only through  the  very large  computers. But  nowadays we  can connect to the Internet through our laptops, smartphones, TVs  etc.There  are  data  findings  pointing  to  the  explosion  of mobile  web  growth  that  keeps  growing  to  the  point  of superiority  over  the  desktop  usage  (Fig.  1). Fig. 1.  Global Mobile vs Desktop Internet  User ProjectionIt  is  really  good  news  as  we  can  have  access  to  the Internet in any place and any time we  want. Such oppor-tunity is very  necessary and  helpful in business. Therefore we  always  need  for  things  to  work  quickly.Websites  designed  using  traditional  approach  do  not provide with the proper level of user experience. Therefore, there  was  raised  a  question  of  the  approach  that  could be  called  optimal  in  web  development.  That  is  the  one would  require  minimum  resources  and  therewith  provide the  access  to  web  content  from  any  device.


2.The object of research and its technological audit:
The  object  of  research  is  responsive  web  design  as  an approach in web development  that is  based on three  main components and used in conjunction with such approachesas  mobile-first  and  using  SVG  formatting.  It  provides  a  high  level  of  user  experience  to  access  the  Internet from  any  device.With the huge variety of mobile screen sizes, we should develop  web  sites  that  will  respond  to  all  of  them.  It’s actually  challenging  and  every  app  and  web  developer faces  with  it.  Nowadays the  users  have  possibility  to  ac-cess the Internet  from the giant  screen to the  smartwatch.The  best  approach  to  responsive  web  development  is designing for devices  with different size or  resolution (not only  for  such  as  MacBook  or  Samsung  Galaxy  S7)  with ability  of  design  and  text  adaptation.

3.  The aim and objects of the research:
The  aim  of  research  is  to  describe  а  concept  of  re-sponsive  web design  and to give  some practical  examples of  this  developing  approach.  Special  attention  is  paid  to HTML  and  CSS tips  and tricks.  To  achieve  the  research aim  the  following  objects  were  chosen:
1.  To find different concepts in definition of responsive web  design.
2.  To  describe  key  components  in  developing  of  re-sponsive  websites.
3.  To  describe  practical  examples  in  developing.
4.  To  analyze  use  of  responsiveness  in  some  frame-work.


4.  Literature review:
We  considered how  HTML5  allows the  developers to create  more  dynamic  and  engaging  web  content  for  dif-ferent  use  cases  and  user  experiences .We took  into consideration an advice  in HTML5 and CSS3  there  is  a  necessity  to  design  responsive  and future-proof websites that meet the  demands of web users.There  were  analyzed  undocumented  techniques  and tips    for  making  a  solution  to  web  design  problems. We  also  studied  how to  create  professional-looking  web-sites and use the most  modern and effective tutorial-based instructions  on  CSS  .We studied  the other  authors   define the  concept of  responsive  web  design  as  well  as  we  considered  the options  for  making  images  more  responsive.This research highlights the importance of using frame-works  in  web  development  and  describes  responsiveness of  such  a  modern  framework  as  Twitter  Bootstrap.We  also  took  into  account  the  research  on  this  issue of  our  native  scientists.Thus,  the  analysis  results  allow  to  conclude  that  the special  attention should be paid to  the mobile  experience in  web  development. With  new HTML5  and CSS3  stan-dards  we have enough tools to provide effective solutions for  all  mobile  devices.We  determined  the concept  of  responsive  web  design as  a  philosophy  of  web  development,  which  consists  in using  of  specified  modern  tools  as  well  as  there  were considered  some  examples  of  their  practical  application.


6.  Research results:
Responsive web design is a relatively new trend in web design  resources. But now  it’s  one of the  main indicators of  the  website  quality.  Even  if  you  know  nothing  about web  design and development it is not  complicated  to un-derstand  the  concept  and  estimate  the  web  site  quality.For  the  first  time  ever the  term  of  responsive  design was  announced  in  2011 according  to  which the  web  site can be called as responsive developed if it reacts on browser with changes  by adjusting the space between elements. In  order to  understand this  approach the  content can  be compared  to  the  water  as  it  fills  browser  space  in  the same  way.So if the web site  is responsive we see browser  content flowed  on  the  available  space.We  can  open  the  site  in  browser  and  then  change its  size  and the  content  will  also  change dynamically  for arranging  itself optimally.  Speaking  about mobile  devices, this  process  works  automatically.We have already mentioned that responsive developing is  with  many  challenges.  We  need  cater  for  a  variety  of devices. We  also have to  think about changing width from small  to mid, from mid to large,  from  large to  extra-large and  everything  in  between.Of course, the main things for worrying with responsive web  design  are  our  content  of  the  web  site.  We  need  to think  how  this  flows  from  width  to  width  and  fits  into our  design.  We  need  ensure  cohesiveness  and  consistent of  the  different  design  elements.The aim  of responsive  web design  is allowing  webpages look  great  and  fits  their  content  in  response  size  of  the device  that  it  is  viewing  with  [2].Responsive  web  design  often  uses  breakpoints  to  set how  site  layout  will  show  up:  one  design  is  used  below a  breakpoint  and  another  is  used  above  that  breakpoint. The  breakpoints  are  usually  depended  on  the  browser width.  One  of  the  best  examples  is  the  website  of  The Boston  Globe,  an American  daily newspaper.  We  can  see at  Fig.  3  how  it provides  really  responsive  design  across all the devices.The same HTML is supported to all devices, using CSS to change the appearance  of the layout.  A single  codebase can  support users with  differently sized viewports,  rather than  creating  a  separate  site and  corresponding codebase for  desk  tops,  tablets,  laptops  and  phones  of  all  sizes.Elements  in  responsive  design transform on the page as the width grows or shrinks.  For example, a design with four columns on  the wide-screen monitor  may transform  to three columns  on a  desktop  design and  two  columns on  a  tablet.In  this  way  responsive  design  approach  appears  as the  way  to  ensure  access  to  information  despite  of  the device.  It’s  possible  to  hide  secondary  content  or  some items  or  even navigation on smallest screens. In the same time  decisions  about  its actions  for  different screen  sizes should be based on user  needs and knowledge about them.We  can  also  create  a  mobile-only  websites.  They  are denoted  in  the  URL  by  using  the  «m.»  prefix  [1].  It  is a  great  approach. Developers  would  create websites  only for  mobile  devices,  installing  fixed  layout  and  dedicated format. Search engines ranked to mobile sits, but nowadays the  same  advantages  are  given  to  responsive  websites. One  of  the  disadvantages  in  creation  of  separate  site  is the  requirement  in  major  maintenance.So increasing the search engine optimization of website is  a  big  argument  for  responsive  design  usage  as  the  re-sponsive websites are much more search engine friendly [9].According to the information above, responsive approach has more advantages over  creating the separate  sites. Using a  single  codebase  can make  development  faster and  makes maintenance easier over time. Responsive design is also rela-tively «future-proof» in that it can support  new breakpoints.